# cat-vs-dog
I'll be taking you through the entire process of how i arrived at what i arrived
The most basic NN classifier anyone would go for is cat and dog classification. But why are Neural Networks preferred for a binary classification? We do have Logistic Regression,SVM and Decision Trees and others to help with binary classification.
<br>
The major problem being feature extraction. Feature Extraction is the process of determining and extracting what aspects of the data are most helpful in determining the corresponding output.With Generic Numeric data there are techniques like PCA to help with the feature extraction. But what of images? What about a cat makes it a cat? Pointy Ears?Fur?Paws?Color? but there are several variation of these atrributes within the cat class itself. Neural Networks are particularly good at feature extraction without human intervention. <br>
These features are extracted by convolving kernel(a Matrix) over the given image.These matrices are specifically used for a certain kind of pattern say left edge, smooth bottom corner etc... Convolutions extract these features while also shrinking the size of the image reducing the unnecessary repeated computations.
Hence i landed on CNN for the classification task. <br>
# Dataset
<br>The dataset used for this task is <a href="https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/tongpython/cat-and-dog">cat and dog</a> dataset from Kaggle. Although I did start with the much popular <a href="https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/alvarole/asirra-cats-vs-dogs-object-detection-dataset">ASIRRA</a>. However there are corrupted images in the dataset which I have come to know rather late.Now that we have a dataset,the next task entails labelling the data as this dataset isnt labeled. The labeling process is starightly forward. Next comes Data pre-processing so your network model trains on accurate data. The dataset is usually split into three parts : Train,Test (Informs us about the final accuracy of the model after completing the training phase),Validate (Validation split helps to improve the model performance by fine-tuning the model after each epoch) <br>
# Building the Model
CNN Architecture has 3 convolution layers followed by a fully connected layer. We will be using keras Sequential module to build the layers in this Notebook. Pooling shrinks the size of the image and is followed after a convolution layer where features are extracted using various Kernals.Dropouts randomly turn off some neurons reducing computations and the chance of over-fitting.
<br>
Finally the output matrix of the final layer is flattened into a 1D Matrix(Array) and is fed as inputs to the fully connected Neural Network. The final output layer has neurons corresponding to the number of classes (2 in this case).The model is then validated over a validation dataset. Performance metrics such as Accuracy,Recall help determine how good the model performs.
